ENG-2548 - Passwordless form field docs (#3691)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: astro/src/content/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/passwordless/magic-links.mdx

import InlineField from 'src/components/InlineField.astro';
import InlineUIElement from 'src/components/InlineUIElement.astro';
import JSON from 'src/components/JSON.astro';
import PasswordlessLoginTemplates from 'src/content/docs/_shared/_passwordless-login-templates.mdx';
import { Code } from 'astro/components';
import { YouTube } from '@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube';

## Overview

Magic link authentication allows a user to prove their identity without a password.

> With FusionAuth, magic links authentication is by default implemented with a one use, timebound code, delivered by email or SMS. However, that is not the only option. If you need more customization, you can use the [passwordless API](/docs/apis/passwordless) to generate a code. Then you may deliver it by another method, such as a push notification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Magic links authentication is provided by FusionAuth using a single-use, time-bound code, delivered by email or SMS. However, that is not your only option. If you need more customization, you can use the [passwordless API](/docs/apis/passwordless) to generate a code. Then you may deliver it by another method, such as a push notification.
```

## Magic Links

> This feature in FusionAuth sends a secure, one time, timebound encoded code. If a user enters an email address, this is sent via email. If the user enters a phone number, this is sent via SMS. When a user visits the link or enters the code from their SMS message, they are logged in, as if by magic. They don't need to provide any other credentials; ownership and access to the code is considered proof of who they are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature in FusionAuth sends a secure, single-use, time-bound, encoded code. If a user enters an email address, this is sent via email. If the user enters a phone number, this is sent via SMS. When a user visits the link or enters the code from their SMS message, they are logged in, as if by magic. They don't need to provide any other credentials; ownership and access to the code is considered proof of who they are.
```

In either case, you should:

> * Configure your SMTP/Messenger server settings under <Breadcrumb>Tenants -> Transports</Breadcrumb>. If you are testing this flow out locally, you may want to use [mailcatcher](https://mailcatcher.me/) or a simple HTTP server as a mock messenger for SMS cases.

Reviewer: Let's rename it after, just in case.

> * Configure your SMTP/Messenger server settings under <Breadcrumb>Tenants -> Transports</Breadcrumb>. If you are testing this flow out locally, you may want to use [mailcatcher](https://mailcatcher.me/) or a simple HTTP server as a mock messenger for SMS cases.

Author: Fixed. @bhalsey - here is what needs updating after 2601.

The call to [`/api/passwordless/start`](/docs/apis/passwordless#start-passwordless-login) begins the authentication process, and returns a response with a code:

<JSON title="Start Magic Link Email Login Response JSON" src="passwordless/start-response.json" />

<JSON title="Start Magic Link Phone Login Response JSON" src="passwordless/start-phone-response.json" />

Possession of this one-time code authenticates the end user. Deliver this code to the end user using whatever method you'd like. If you want to use FusionAuth to deliver the code via email or SMS, see [Sending the Code Using FusionAuth](#sending-the-code-using-fusionauth).

#### Sending the Code Using FusionAuth

This is an optional API call. If you want to send the code via the email server or SMS messenger configured in FusionAuth, you may use the [`/api/passwordless/send`](/docs/apis/passwordless#send-passwordless-login) API endpoint.

Using this API call allows you the benefits of FusionAuth locale-aware email or SMS templates and delivery capabilities without requiring you to use the FusionAuth login forms.

#### The User Enters the Code

> Once the user possesses the code, they must provide it to your application. You must build an interface for them to do so. For email use cases, the user must provide the `code` value on their own. For phone number use cases, the typical pattern is for your application to present a form immediately after sending the code to the user. The `code` value can be available as a hidden field on a form, but the `oneTimeCode` value must be provided by the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the user possesses the code, they must provide it to your application. You must build an interface for them to do so. For email use cases, the email message will often contain a link to a form where the user can enter the `code`, or the link will hit a back end endpoint that processes the code.

For phone number use cases, the typical pattern is for your application to present a form immediately after sending the code to the user. The `code` value can be available as a hidden field on a form, but the `oneTimeCode` value must be provided by the user.
```

## Security

With magic link authentication, if the user's email account or phone number is hijacked, their account on your system is compromised. However, many organizations have security policies and protections around email accounts. It is often easier to protect and regularly change one email account password than to change all of a user's passwords. Email accounts are also more likely to have two-factor authentication enabled.

One way to increase the security of your magic link authentications is to decrease the lifetime of the code. This will help if the email or SMS message is compromised or accidentally forwarded.

There are no limits on how many passwordless requests can be made for a user, but only the most recent code is valid. Using any of the others, even if they have not yet expired, will display an `Invalid login credentials` message to the user.

> If someone tries to log in with an email or phone number that is not present in the FusionAuth user database, they'll see the same notification as they would if the email existed (NOT TRUE FOR PHONE). No email will be sent.

Author: security note

Reviewer: What does a user see with a bad phone number?

Author: Corrected to use our new solution.

If you use the passwordless API, follow the principle of least privilege, and limit calls to which the API key has access. If you are using the API key only for magic link passwordless login, don't give this key any other permissions.

### What About Users' Passwords

> When FusionAuth is your user datastore, you can optionally choose to disable passwords at the tenant level to make the passwordless login process easier. See the [Password enabled](/docs/get-started/core-concepts/tenants#password) tenant setting.

Author: not directly related to this, but now that we don't require passwords of users, they no longer need to work around this.
